Once around, Io. Io is one of the four
large moons of Jupiter, first discovered
by Galileo back in 1610.
He was turning the first generation of
telescope to the night sky looking at
the planet Jupiter and noticed that
there were a number of small little
attendant starlike objects that always
seemed to be in a line but moved changed
in position from hour to hour, from
night to night, but nevertheless always
stayed with Jupiter as Jupiter changed
position across the sky. And he realized
these were in orbit around the planet.
And of course that proved that not
everything rotated around the earth and
led him to adopt the idea of capernicus
and others that the sun rather than the
earth was perhaps the center of the
solar system. So when you look with a
small telescope or even a pair of really
good binoculars, you will see the disc
of the planet perhaps with the darker
cloud belts just running across the
center and the small dots of the
Galilean moons as they're known. Up to
four of them. Sometimes one or more of
them can be either hiding behind the
planet or directly in the line of sight
in front of it. uh they orbit around the
equator and you can see that that
equatorial plane is slightly tilted in
the image there. They're not perfectly
aligned uh but they can often transit
across in front of the planet or go into
eclipse behind it. Here's a picture that
I took a few years ago now with a 10-in
reflector and a webcam showing the disc
of Jupiter with those lovely cloud belts
and the moon Io there just about to uh
move into transit across the face of
Jupiter itself.
It's about the same size as the Earth's
moon almost exactly. And uh so it's a
fairly decentsized world in its own
right. But of course it orbits Jupiter,
so we call it a moon. If it orbited
around the sun, well, we might then deem
it large enough to be either a dwarf
planet or a full-blown planet, depending
on what else was going on in terms of
whether it had companions in orbit with
it or not. a slightly shaky definition
of the difference between dwarf planet
and planet in my opinion, but that's
another story.
Now, there are these four large moons
and here they are laid out to scale. Io
on the left and then we have Europa,
Ganymede, and Kalisto. And a pie chart
at the bottom there shows the relative
masses of them. Ganymde is by far the
largest. Kalisto comes in second and
then Io and finally Europa is the
lightweight and the smallest of all of
them. And there is a tiny wedge for all
the other tiny moons and moonlets of
Jupiter but it's almost impossible to
see it in the pie chart because they are
so small and the mass is dominated by
the big four. Um lovely pictures of them
showing how each of them is very diff
different. Io very yellowy orange in
color. Europa, fairly bright and shiny
but with that dark material on the
surface. A mixed gray appearance for
Ganymede,
the largest of the lot and then the very
dark color of Kalisto peppered in the
white spots of impact craters. But we're
here to talk about Io in this video. So,
here is a Voyager 1 image up close
during a flyby where they were able to
get this fantastic view of the South
Pole region of Io with some of the
highest mountains visible there in the
image as well as quite a number of those
dark craterike objects and some sineuous
marks lines running across the surface.
And of course some of those uh crater
like things those are volcanic caldera
rather than impact craters and some of
the sineuous lines those are lava tubes
because this is a very volcanic place.
Here's a more modern image taken by the
Juno spacecraft which is in orbit around
Jupiter as I put this together and has
done a nice flyby of the North Pole
region again with some sharp mountains
sticking up and lots of round craterike
structures, but they are mostly volcanic
rather than impact craters. And you can
see a lot of the lava flows and material
that's looking like it's been flowing
across the surface there. Here's the
whole surface mapped and unwrapped
trying to project it onto a rectangle.
Obviously distorts the polar regions,
but you can see the amazing number of
these dark craters with material ringing
around them that all just points towards
this uh volcanic landscape.
very few actual impact craters from
incoming space rocks. Although it does
get hit, they get buried by the material
ejected from the volcanoes. And when we
look at this landscape in terms of color
and spectroscopy, cutting the color up
into all its components, we can tell
that this material is largely
sulfurbased. a huge amount of actual
natural sulfur, sulfur dioxide, sulfur
triioxide, other compounds, and a little
bit of silicate, ordinary rock as we
would uh simply describe it.
So, all this volcanic activity
really is the mark of Io. It's a super
volcanic satellite. I love the picture
on the left which really shows uh the
different landscapes and some enormous
super volcanoes on the surface and then
on the right we have one clearly showing
the high resolution image with the lava
flows coming out from it. Here's an
active caldera with molten lava in the
center. Mostly sulfurbased and again
that yellow of sulfur around the
outside. But the black and the orange
are often different forms of sulfur as
we shall see. Here's a 1997 Galileo
image of the uh surface of Io with an
active volcano erupting with that blue
material up at the top there uh being
lit by the incoming radiation from the
sun containing a lot of uh sulfur
compounds, sulfur dioxide, sulfur mono
oxide, all sorts of uh things but
predominated by this uh sulfur. Another
set of images here of an active volcano
animated at the top there showing an
eruption in progress. Um, and with the
ejector moving slightly downwind in the
tenuous atmosphere around Io. It hasn't
really got enough gravity to hang on to
the material around it very well,
especially given its proximity to
Jupiter. And again, those active
volcanic regions in the images on the
left. And there's another one down here
that's also an active volcano.
Now, using infrared, it's very
straightforward to detect the heat
plumes from all these volcanoes. And
this is an image taken by Juno, the
spacecraft that's orbiting Jupiter at
the moment, looking at Io side on with
the night side to the left and the
sorry, the night side to the right and
the day side to the left. And you can
see that the night side is just peppered
with the heat plumes of active volcanoes
all over it. Just showing how
tremendously active this uh surface is.
This is another lovely shot of an active
lava flow glowing orange and red as it
pours across the surface there. Just
amazing. Now, this is all caused by the
fact that Jupiter is so close and that
Io, Europa, and Ganymede are in a tidal
lock arrangement. They they not only
keep one face towards the planet as
moons tend to do when they're fairly
close in. The uh tidal effect of gravity
soon results in them keeping one face
turned inwards. But as this animation
shows, for every lap that Ganymede does,
Europa does exactly two and Io does
exactly four. So they keep meeting each
other in the same place. So, um, next
time around we're going to get to the
situation when Ganymede gets to the top.
Here it comes. It's coming up to the top
now. And then down to the bottom and it
meets Europa. Comes up to the top. Meet
Europa again. And so on. So there's all
sorts of interactions going on here.
This pumps the orbits into being more
elliptical. That drives the planets
close, sorry, the moons closer to the
planet and further away. And because of
that they get stretched and squished and
this creates frictional heating within
them. And of course Io being the closest
in gets the strongest effect. The tidal
forces drop off with the cube of the
distance. So being close in is uh the by
far the strongest.
So internally within Io things have very
much been dominated by that internal
heat.
The temperature has meant that it has
lost a lot of the volatile material. All
the water and ammonia and methane that
it might have once had has been boiled
away to space and only the less volatile
materials remain. As a result, the
density is quite high. We think there's
an iron an iron sulfur core in the
center and then the lower mass iron
sulfur and sulfides further out with
some rock some magnesium silicate
phosphorite uh materials in the mantle
um and possibly a liquid magma ocean
molten rock but again a terrific amount
of sulfur left. Sulfur and iron have a
very strong relationship. Sulfur is
described as a ciduropile. It likes to
bond with iron and so it tends to
associate with the iron cores. And it's
likely that Io perhaps once was a much
more massive object but has lost all
that volatile material because of this
continuous tidal heating.
Now orbiting so close to Jupiter, it's
well inside the realm of Jupiter's very
strong magnetic field. And so much so
along with the other moons that there is
strong coupling between
plasma tubes of material that has been
emitted and lost by those moons into
space that then gets tangled up with the
uh magnetic field lines of Jupiter as
the moons sweep around and ends up being
funneled down towards the polar regions
on the planet creating the aurora at the
top there and the amount of radiation in
these uh regions around Jupiter is
really quite severe and it actually
dominates the decisions about where to
park and where to orbit our various
spacecraft trying to avoid the radiation
damage from all this ionized uh material
being churned up by the rotation of
Jupiter and its magnetic field and the
influence of all of the moons as well.
only out at Kalisto, the fourth moon, uh
things a little bit calmer.
But that lovely aurora, here's a more
detailed photograph of the north pole of
Jupiter with the auroral region and the
footprint of Io on the left and of the
other two, Europa and Ganymede. These
are where the flux tubes from those
moons are currently impacting and
drawing out spirals on the surface of
the uh cloud tops of Jupiter there uh
creating that amazing blue pattern. And
of course it happens both at the north
pole and the south pole. Um and so
that's quite amazing. So that's the hot
spots where the flux tube from those
moons is currently impacting. And then
of course it leaves a trail as Jupiter
rotates and the moons move creating this
amazing series of spirals.
So not only do you get aurora on the
planet, but the moons pick it up as
well. And the photo on the right is the
aurora kicking off in the tenuous
atmosphere of Io. Um, so that's the
solar wind and all the radiation around
Jupiter all creating auroral effects in
the very thin atmosphere of Io.
Now, I mentioned how Io is dominated by
sulfur. So, I want to say a few words
about sulfur and how important it
probably is in terms of the uh necessary
components for life. And we'll start
just with pure sulfur. One of the things
that is interesting about it is that it
can come in different forms, different
allotropes. These are different
molecular arrangements of two or more
sulfur atoms. You can start with a
simple pair S2. You can have S3 in a
chain. You can have S3 in a triangle, S4
in a square or a chain. and then rings
of five, six or seven or even eight
sulfur atoms and they can have branching
chains and all sorts of things. And this
is a characteristic of carbon in the
molecules of life that we can have all
these different branching and ringed
chains that make up all of the amazing
chemistry. And you can do it with sulfur
as well up to a point. uh you have to
mix in other elements as well to get
other interesting bonding arrangements.
But by adding oxygen, nitrogen and so on
into the mix, you can build a myriad of
possibilities.
But the difference is that the bonds
between the sulfur atoms are weaker than
the bonds between the carbon atoms in
the molecules of life. And so these
molecules, the more complex forms of
sulfur in all of these amazing
arrangements are less stable
and therefore fall apart under higher
temperatures very easily and really you
need to be operating at much lower
temperatures in order to get any
stability at all. Now on IO that is not
the case. It is very very hot. So,
you're not really going to see these
forms of sulfur being able to survive
for very long. They're going to tend to
break down into just the uh most stable
configurations, being the only ones that
stand a chance of coping with those
extremes of heat.
But in lower temperature situations,
things get more interesting. And on
Earth, what we find is that two of the
amino acids that are key to the story of
life are based on carbon for the chains,
nitrogen and oxygen and hydrogen, but
also sulfur. And these are cyine and
methionine. And it's cyine that we show
on the right here with three carbon
atoms in gray, oxygen in red, nitrogen
in blue, and the sulfur atom in the gold
color there. And it turns out that these
are absolutely fundamental to some of
the most primitive and most ancient
enzymes that biochemistry is based on.
They tend to have a grouping of sulfur
and iron in the center. And we can see
that here. The blue are uh the iron
atoms and the gold color of the sulfers
linking the cubic arrangement of four
ions and four sulfers together there and
then branching off to cyine
amino acids at the side there where the
other chains are shown that then create
the holding structure the rest of the
protein and the uh enzyme around it. But
the active center is this grouping of
iron and sulfur. And there's some of the
ferotin and other most ancient enzymes
that seem to be universal in all life on
Earth are based on this sort of
arrangement. And it's quite plausible
that this was the original biochemistry.
It's all to do with this affinity that
sulfur has for iron and the prevalence
of that in the substructures within the
earth perhaps at the boundary between
the ocean and the core where we have
things like black smokers. We seem to
see sulfurbased
biochemistry,
iron sulfur reactions being fundamental
to the most primitive forms of life. Um,
the detail of it is a whole other story
which I'll go into sometime, but maybe
what we're seeing here is some hints.
I'll say more about that in another
video. But for now, thanks very much for
listening to my whistle stop tour around
Io. Amazing photograph of IO here.
Thanks a lot.